an overwhelming call at the United
Nations for a ceasefire in Gaza Israel
and the US among the few voting against
the resolution how isolated are both
nations from most of the world which
opposes the war can International
opposition have any impact this is
Inside
[Music]
Story
hello welcome to the program I'm Adrian
finigan the Hamas killing of
1,147 people in southern Israel on
October 7th caused Global outrage since
then though 15 times as many
Palestinians mostly women and children
have been killed in a merciless bombing
campaign by one of the world's most
powerful militaries backed by the US and
Western allies these countries Proclaim
support for human rights and
international law both of which Israel
tramples on daily in Gaza and the
occupied West Bank to how is Western
support for Israel viewed elsewhere
could the Gaza War change the current
world order is support for Israel
damaging the West We'll be asking these
questions and more of our guests in just
a few moments but first this report from
Cara Le on how Israel and the US have
found themselves in a minority of world
opinion months of bombing and a
worsening humanitarian
crisis despite growing calls for a halt
to Israel's war on Gaza the world's most
powerful body the United Nations
security Council has failed to put a
stop to Israel's violence with the US
wielding its veto power standing alone
in blocking resolutions for a ceasefire
but the demands have not stopped moving
to the UN General Assembly I used my
recent attendance at the Doha forum
and every other platform I can to
encourage cooperation among states with
the same singular goal in mind to make
peace for
all in the name of
humanity I ask you all once
again stop this violence
now the assembly spoke loud and clear
and overwhelming votes in favor of a
resolution seeking a humanitarian
ceasefire and the release of all
captives from Gaza 153 member states
supported it 21 more than the last time
the assembly called for a humanitarian
truce War Tor Ukraine was among the few
countries to abstain refusing to call
for a halt to a war backed by its
Western allies the US and Israel however
voted against the resolution we support
speaking out with one voice to condemn
Hamas for his terrorist actions on
October
7th why is that so hard to say
unequivocally that murdering babies and
gunning down parents in front of their
children is horrific the exploitation of
the Palestinians has made the UN a moral
stain on Humanity why are you continuing
to allow them to make the United Nations
irrelevant our brother the resolution is
non-binding ing but it carries political
weight and reflects a global perspective
of the war the Arab and Islamic
countries who spearheaded the effort
have pledged to use this as momentum to
keep pushing for a
ceasefire the Palestinian Authority has
welcomed the resolution and urged
countries to pressure Israel to adopt
the
ceasefire as ground battles intensify in
Northern Gaza Israel has carried out
some of the heaviest bombing in days in
the
South the UN vote indicates Israel's
growing diplom atic isolation US
President Joe Biden has warned it risks
losing international support because of
its quote indiscriminate bombing even
close Ally Australia backed the UN
resolution in a rare split with the
us while the world waits to see if the
UN Security Council will hold another
vote people on the streets far from the
corridors of Western power are making
their voices
heard Cara leg Al jazer for Inside Story
so let's bring in our guests for today's
discussion from Paris we're joined by
Tamir porus a former career Diplomat in
Venezuela and a policy adviser
specializing in Latin American economics
and geopolitics from Cape Town South
Africa we're joined by malani verwood uh
who's a former South African Ambassador
and Member of Parliament in Nelson
Mandela's Administration and here in
Doha is Sami homz ass associate
professor at Northwestern University in
Qatar he specializes in social movements
the state and Security in the Arab world
a warm welcome to you all Sammy let's
start with you um how significant is
this un general assembly vote it's
highly unlikely to lead to a binding
resolution in the security Council
anytime soon is it I mean is it the best
the UN can do of what relevance is this
vote to someone suffering under the
constant bombardment in
Gaza no I mean on one hand it's uh it's
great that we've seen a shift of 20
countries uh in the last month but of
course it's not uh you know uh quick
enough and uh of course it's uh
wonderful to see that the US is now
isolated I think that's the first step
um is that it's isolated and we hope
that the next resolution that comes out
um will see a change and the US won't be
able to protect uh you know its
interests and is isra any anymore uh but
in a sense it is also um as you know the
Israeli ambassador to the UN said right
he it's total double speak I mean he
blames the Palestinians for everything
but they're the ones who are constantly
uh breaking international law um and so
in a way the the UN has become uh
ineffectual but I think what what is
really important is this movement um
what you see is uh International global
solidarity actually sort of moving this
dial and I think that's what's really
important is that uh we see that you
know even this resolution it's not put
on the table Antonio guz he did not
invoke article 99 because Russia told
him or China told him what what there
this movement we're seeing is because of
global public opinion and pressure on
the streets in uh the hallways of power
um in you know in all sorts of ways that
you know it could talk talk about in in
this uh you know in the next minutes but
I think that that is really where um
where we should really take note uh that
none of this would happen if it wasn't
for this public pressure Milani 10
Nations voted against including the US
the UK and Germany were among the 10
Nations who abstained how isolated does
this vote leave the US picking up on on
what from what Sami was saying what
message does it send
and is that message likely to be heeded
and if so
when well I mean the message is very
very strong right um it's not often that
the UN votes on something so strongly um
and agree on something that strongly so
the message is very clear the question
is what will it result in um the moral
message is there and I mean also
interesting for me living in Africa only
three countries did not vote for it um
two abstained and it was only Liberia
who voted against it um so you know even
in a continent as diverse as Africa
there is seems to be a very very strong
message and one has to ask how can they
not be you know how can one not ask for
a ceasefire um after everything that
we've seen and and and you know that
we've seen on our television screens now
for so long um but the question is of
course the with the Biden Administration
um are they actually going to heat this
message and well one would think that he
would increasingly start thinking about
the fact that he is losing a lot of
Support also in America from the liberal
left um but it you know it seems that
this relationship with with Israel just
keeps on holding them in some way both
financially um and also diplomatically
seems to consistently still support
Israel in this
war Tam um picking up on that allies are
supposed to speak supportively of allies
at least in public and take a more
honest and robust tone in private what
are we to make then of President Biden's
remarks that Israel's indiscriminate
bombing of Gaza is losing it public
support uh and that PM prime minister
Netanyahu needs to change his government
and his stance on a two-state solution
where is that coming
from well I I believe that President
Biden is probably speaking about his own
public opinion because Israel's public
opinion I mean Israel's support all over
the world has never really existed on
the Palestinian cause I think the the
vote at the UN National General Assembly
resolution on on on Palestine reflects
what the uh I would say historic opinion
in the global South is about uh the
conflict and the uh the fate of the
Palestinian people and the rights of the
Palestinian people it is in the in the
west in the United States in the uh in
the European Union where governments
have been supporting supportive of
Israel uh somehow in disconnect uh with
a growing uh portion of their own public
opinions who are of course appalled at
the uh at the barbaric uh campaign of
bombing that has been uh uh that has
been imposed over Gaza and of course it
is their own stance their own stand uh
supporting Israel despite of these uh I
would say proves that are that are
visible to to all public's opinion and
to the world that is creating an
internal problem in uh Western societies
and for Western governments such as the
US government of President Joe Biden and
and I I I think he's referring to that
public opinion that uh doesn't
understand how governments in the west
are uh um supportive of uh the
government of Israel uh irrespectively
of uh its actions that are clearly
violating international law and and of
course committing war
crimes let's um discuss the the points
that you bring up there with with Sammy
uh Sammy what do we what are we to make
of the the the Stark differences in
position on Israel and its bombing of
Gaza uh of governments I'm not talking
about public opinion here now but
governments in the global South uh
compared to those richer nations in the
north look the the whole issue really
stems from the fact that uh Israel is uh
ultimately a European settler Colony so
it makes perfect sense that uh Europeans
so the Richer countries Europeans
Americans are going to support uh their
their settlers and so I think this is
this is a really important point that
keeps getting missed and this is why uh
there's a a real interest uh from the US
uh to support uh the Israeli State
because it's supports its you know its
interests in in the region and I you
know I would go as far as to say that uh
we talk about ethnic cleansing and
genocide but really I think what we see
here is is the US uh actively involved
in this and it's just Israeli soldiers
doing the you know the labor of it but I
think this is why you don't see global
South countries supporting uh Israel
they're they're not you know it isn't a
global South settler Colony so I think
this is um and and I think one one other
thing I'd want to say on on President
Biden's remarks is that you know he's he
said things to this effect in the last
month that you know things are are are
public opinion is Shifting and so on um
I I find these as sort of diversions
they're just uh ways of to sort of buy
buy time I mean you know you can keep
saying this but ultimately the US can
turn off uh the sort of the weapon
supplies it continues to do so even uh
even in light of these massive
atrocities um and it could you know turn
this off and according to Israeli
generals and former generals they would
tell you that it would end this war very
quickly if that stops melani is this
shattering the reputation of Nations who
continue to stand by Israel the war on
Gaza I I mean and uh what does this this
conflict mean for international law who
in future polies nation state actors
when they appear to be able to act with
impunity well let me just first say in
terms of what the previous speaker was
saying I think funny is the name um you
know of course that South Africa would
very much Echo that on an official level
um exactly that that you know South
Africa was very aware and thec
government in particular how Israel had
very close relationships with Israel
sorry with the aparte government um for
many years and how many of the weapons
that were actually used to kill
antipathic activist came either from
Israel directly or through Israel and so
you know then of course also that thec
government can see how the Palestinian
cause the fight for Freedom um against
land occupation Etc very much mirrors
their own battle for for so many decades
for freedom in South Africa Mandela of
course famously said that South Africans
wouldn't be free um until uh the
Palestinian people are also free um so I
just wanted to to Echo that in terms of
international
law you know as an African and somebody
from the global South the global South
has always said and has always pointed
out for a very long time for well not
always but certainly for decades um the
hypocrisy when it comes to international
law and the application of international
law in particular when it comes to a
superpower like America who likes to
play this sort of global policeman And
yet when the rules um have to apply to
them or to countries that they support
they often change the rules or somehow
want to reinterpret the the the the
rules and and that's not something new
for for people in the global South we
are very aware of that um and and so the
question is not a new question it is
just whether this is finally The Tipping
Point where the world will see that um
you know to use the the children's story
that the king actually has no clothes on
when it comes to America um in this in
this moral Global um question Tamir is
this a Tipping Point to what extent is
this a defining moment not just for the
UN but the current world order and
countries that claim to stand for
defending human
rights well yeah it it is a test
definitely it is a test but it is
reassuring to see that uh in the general
assembly of of the United Nations such a
unanimous uh stance in defense of the
rights of the Palestinian people uh in
this particular case but that also
um um says a lot about the aspiration of
the global South and the International
Community at large to have uh an
international I would say International
realm that um is organized around
international law so that every country
has to abide to international law and in
this case it is very clear that the
behavior of of Israel is of course
opposed to to those values at the same
time in the United Nations for instance
once one uh country like Israel behaves
in such a manner there should be you
know the recourse to the United Nation
Security Council uh where you know the
members of the security Council would be
um uh able to impose sanctions
International sanctions in this case to
the country that is violating
international law but we all know that
there you know the political logic and
the geopolitical logic um imposes itself
because the United States would uh
exercise its veto rights so it's it's a
moment where at the same time you see
this very large aspiration but also
where you can show the limits of the
current International architecture that
uh the tools are there but there are
also political tools for those countries
who want to impose a unilateral vision
of uh of of or unilateral um uh force in
in the international realm so it becomes
very clear to the I would say the
international public opinion what needs
to be changed in this architecture for
once again a a more balanced and and and
peaceful International Arena to to exist
so Tam is the UN currently a complete
waste of time nothing but a a debating
theater of of wishes and dreams I mean
its critics have been saying for a long
time that it's not fit for purpose its
credibility uh and once again that of
the Security Council is on the line here
right now isn't it I mean if the un
can't stop the indiscriminate killing of
of Innocence it's as good as
useless well it it I I understand and
share that frustration but at the same
time it's the only tool available for
small countries those who cannot impose
Force so if I mean this is this is again
this is real politic and and indeed in
the face of real politic the UN cannot
do much but at least it is a Forum where
that Injustice can be underlined and I
think it's very important that these is
uh that that you know that it the
ability to the international for the
International Community and the global
South to express its opinion and to and
to unveil the double standards and the
injustices is in itself something that
is worthy of keeping but I understand of
course the frustration that these tools
uh do not allow uh the International
Community to Stop The Killing and the
oppression over the Palestinian people
melan do you do you want to come in
there and and and expand upon on what uh
tamy was
saying well I mean again from South
Africa Africa and I think more generally
the the global South has for a very very
long time complained and pointed out
that a body like in particularly the UN
Security Council is not representative
of the whole globe and neither does it
serve the need and the interests of of a
very large section two-thirds of the
world's population and so they have been
critical about this for so long but I do
and of course also like bodies of the IC
and it and it and it is worthwhile
mentioning that um South Africa has
asked um quite a while ago already the
international criminal court to issue a
warrant of arrest for president
Netanyahu for for war crimes and it's
going to be I think from a from a
southern perspective it's going to be
very interesting to see what the IC will
do
um the the but I do agree that you know
at the moment we don't actually have
something better than the UN um yet to
to um hold countries to account um of
course on an economic level this is why
bricks you have seen such a big
expansion and development around bricks
where more than 40 countries wanted to
be part of this um and six um quite big
countries were um or entered bricks this
year and will start being full Partners
on the 1st of January and that is all
part of this effort of the global South
and also of Africa to form a balancing
power um um or a balance against the
sort of superpower of particularly
America um who seems to often not act in
the interest of of the global South
Sammy um after the general assembly vote
Israel's Envoy called the UN a moral
stain on humanity and as far as public
Global opinion is concerned I mean you
could argue that he has a point not for
the reasons that that he was actually
arguing at the time but many people are
so frustrated with the un's apparent
impotence while people are dying every
hour in
Gaza yes I think you know listening to
your other two guests the one thing that
strikes me is that and you've said this
as well is that this is not the first
time we talk about the un uh not meeting
its uh responsibilities but I think this
is one of those moments where uh Global
South countries could really take the
charge and you know I think the IC is a
defunct institution and they I think
Global South countries should be
thinking about alternative institutions
and just bypassing uh you know the the
Western Powers but of course you know
that is uh in some ways a dream talk but
I think I was going to say how how how
Samy would that how would that work
book well I mean I I think you have 150
Nations that have agreed on something
they can actually take action and say
you know we're going we're going to
impose a no-fly zone on on Israel and uh
put that on the table as a threat and
let's let's see where that goes I mean
you
know I I assume my I imagine that things
would probably eventually deescalate
from there rather than escalate into a
global war I don't think that that's
where it would
but the the threat of something like
that or you know thinking about an
alternative uh international criminal
court to sort of uh you know put these
things on the table um not allow Israeli
politicians to travel around like as if
they're not committed uh war crimes I
think some of these things are are
really important ways that we could uh
you know put put pressure to think about
new institutions because we just you
know we get to this point every time
this is not the first time on Palestine
that we've talked about it's the
incapacity of the UN but we find
ourselves here every time um and it's
you know it's tiring and Palestinians
are dying in the meantime and when
they're not dying in Grand great numbers
as they are in Gaza they're dying of
slow genocide uh where that you see for
example in the West Bank right where uh
their territory is shrinking and
shrinking and shrinking and so you know
but but under the radar and nobody cares
nobody cared about the prisoners until
October 7 and now you know people are
talking about Palestinian
prisoners to me some's got a point
hasn't he I mean you know this talk of
of it being high time for for new
institutions is all well and good but in
the meantime people people are dying
now absolutely absolutely but again and
um it it it is ultimately if you will
because we move from from the framework
of and we have shown the limits of uh
International institutions and
international law but it's probably then
to the public opinions in the countries
that are supporting this uh uh
horrendous policies uh for instance the
uh the public opinion in the United
States uh should put pressure on its
government I mean it's it's uh political
action is always difficult it it
requires uh building appropriate tools
uh why aren't Western politicians um um
put to uh to the scrutiny by their own
public opinions on on the supporting of
of Israel why don't we have a a broader
or deeper discussion in the countries
that are responsible ultimately for
supporting Israel in this this is
probably the way you know it is probably
the national public opinions that need
to do the work in order to change the
policies of their own countries which
are backing uh and and probably the this
very same people in Israel again um
where is the public opinion in Israel
and is it supportive of of this
horrendous campaign again I I I think
this this is a time again to to focus on
where things can be changed immediately
in order to reach what we all hope for
which is a ceasefire and then a
political resolution that takes into
account the rights of the Palestinian
people Milani final word to you then do
you have any hope that that that could
happen that this can be brought to a
conclusion quickly without further
suffering and
death was probably not that quickly but
certainly I never underestimate the
strength of ordinary people um on their
governments if they start uniting and I
agree this is now public opinion that
has to really push because um even for
example I think countries should turn
their attention now to the us as well
not only to Israel because we can see
that it's not really working with Israel
but I think if countries like for
example in the European Union Etc starts
putting pressure also on America that
could also help in um more speedily
bringing forth a peaceful resolution um
which is so desperately needed um for
the people of Gaza Milan you you really
think that it's going to come ultimately
down to people
power well people pushing their
political leaders to stop um you know
the Israelis have made it clear they
will not stop until they will in their
view eradicated Hamas which I think
anybody who's grown up amongst
Liberation movements know that you
cannot stop and particularly terrorist
organizations by killing them you have
to take away the conditions that will
that motivates them to exist um and you
know I think the we know that it's not
working on on Israel but I think um
public opinion needs to push the rest of
the world to all stand together and
we've seen many of them have come
together now but the remaining ones and
in this case particularly America who
funds um a large extent this war or to a
large extent contributes to the funding
of this war and also orbe it then in
public um still you know supports the
war um I think we need to you know that
is what's going to to make the
difference is the pressure to to to stop
this there we must end our discussion
many thanks indeed to you all Sami Hames
Milani food and Tamia
poras
and thanks to you for watching you can
see the program again at any time by
going to the website at al.com for
further discussion join us on our
Facebook page on at
facebook.com AJ insid story and you can
join the conversation on X our handle at
AJ inside story from me Adrien finigan
and the whole team here in Doha thanks
for watching I'll see you again bye for
[Music]
now